- [..back to index](index.html)

Happened in 2010-2011
=====================

This section functions as a long and loose introduction for the short
and sturdy research plan in the section 2. I will discuss main
path-dependencies and path-departures during my two first years of
PhD-research in terms theoretical and methodological advancement. I
tried to write a text both comprehensive and simplistic in order to
deliver my point. Unfortunately, it became a written expression of one
thinking out loud.

Defining the sandbox
--------------------

I have used a metaphor of a sandbox when I have referred to some great
challenges I’m constantly facing in my PhD research. To go on with this
cumbersome symbol, in the first place my sandbox is defined by my
scientific background. From then on, it is my quest to find the corner
*where I can apply my theoretical and methodological strengths* and
which is *even partly untouched*.

Finding such corner has become of a greater challenge in the field I’m
working. Same datasets are shared with thousands of researchers as are
the theories. There is a lot of research being done and many
theoretically interesting question have been addressed in very elegant
way. Often by research groups and projects, and it makes it very
challenging for individual researcher.

The title of my original research plan was *Twenty years of transition:
the poverty outcomes of income redistribution schemes in European
Post-Socialist countries* and it defined my corner of the sandbox in
three ways. First, in terms of temporal dimension, I was to research the
post-socialist transition. Second, it defined the spatial dimension of
to cover post-socialist countries in Europe. Thirdly, it defined the
analytical core of my research: the study of interactions between income
redistribution and poverty.

I described and gave reasons for the core of my approach in my original
research plan as follows:

> *The empirical knowledge about welfare state development in post-socialist European countries is so far limited. There is a need for detailed country-specific analysis as well as international comparisons. The overall analytical goal of for the study is to critically assess the development of welfare state from poverty outcomes perspective on post-socialist countries, using selected western countries as a reference point. Theories, approaches and typologies used to study affluent capitalist democracies will be applied, but in a different context and in well tailored applications.*

Soon after starting my research I realized that empirical knowledge was
not *that* limited that I had believed and that my grand idea of
applying *theories, approaches and typologies used to study affluent
capitalist democracies* was not *that* elegant that I had thought.
During the first two months I wrote two abstracts to conferences of
social policy analysis and was chosen to both of them as a panellist.
So, I had to write two papers in first couple of months of my research
for international conferences and it was a great eye opening experience.

To cut the long story short, I found out that research ideas I had
proposed were either done or in process or not possible to conduct. Or,
often, not that interesting. Though the general feedback was rather
encouraging, I felt like I had to develop my approach both from
theoretical and methodological point of view.

### Theoretical advancement

My research is empirical by nature and does not aim at great theoretical
advancement. I wrote in my original plan that *theories, approaches and
typologies used to study affluent capitalist democracies will be
applied, but in a different context and in well tailored applications*.
I soon realized that a lot of tailoring is needed. The overall challenge
I felt I had was to find a satisfactory conceptualization for a
"European post-socialist poverty" that, to my mind and eyes, had several
characteristics. First, poverty was more absolute, (using a very
controversial term here) than in Western Europe. Poor people were more
poor. Second, the different dimensions of poverty were more visible.
Poverty was not just being short of money, but having the overall living
conditions at low level. Both, the physical and service infrastructures
were worsening and affecting the the everyday lives. This lead to the
fourth characteristics that is the growing *within country
inequalities*. Life and living standards were improving in well-off
regions for well-off people in capital cities or regions with foreign
direct investments, but worsening in peripheral regions and "monogorod"
regions. Looking at the national averages in income poverty was masking
the growing spatial inequalities. Fourth, the poverty was not a national
issue any more, but it reflected across the state borders and even
further. In a way, "post-socialist poverty" was becoming European wide
phenomenon. I will discuss these aspect bit further in coming chapters.

### From income to material, from relative to less relative

What comes to conceptualization of poverty I won’t go into too much
details here, but I present some graphs to illustrate the basic
challenges mainstream poverty research has faced in due to enlargement
of EU in figures 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3. Figure 1.1 shows the distribution of
disposable incomes in EU27-countries in 2008. Post-socialist countries
are filled with red and rank well below the Western European countries,
with the exception of Slovenia.

![Distributions of disposable income in
EU27-countries in 2008 *Source: EU-silc*](images/boxplot_income.png) 

EU official poverty threshold is based on relative income poverty,
measured at 60% of national median disposable income. The measure it
produces is called *at-risk-of-poverty rate[^1]* If you the look the
figure 1.2 that shows the trend lines of at-risk-of-poverty rates in
same group of countries. What is obvious is that though the levels of
income are greatly different in countries (e.g. mean income in Austria
is approx. 3 times higher than in neighbouring Hungary) the poverty
levels are not that different (eg. 12,4 % of the people are
at-risk-of-poverty in both countries)

The official poverty measurement of EU is based on the Western European
tradition of poverty research that in it’s current form evolved in
1970’s from Great Britain. The Europe at that time was a group of to
close-to-equally wealthy capitalist democracies and it was sensible also
to do comparative poverty analysis based on national income
distribution. As the main interest was to monitor the advancement of
welfare state at the national level. However, the collapse of Soviet
bloc and the enlargement of EU has changed the picture of Europe and
European poverty. Enlargement introduced poor countries to EU with
considerably lower living standards. That fact only is enough to
challenge current as it not sensible to monitor national trends in
poverty in Bulgaria using poverty line that equals disposable income of
40 Euro a month.

![National at-risk-of-poverty rates using national
level poverty thresholds *Source: Eurostat*](images/pov_nat.png) 

On the other hand, the inclusion process and the basic freedoms of EU
has made the poverty and other social problems a EU wide issues.
Therefore, I think, the analysis of EU poverty should also discuss the
poverty as an EU wide phenomenon and monitor changes in relation to not
just national, but also European standards. This has not been unnoticed
by EU official and adoption of EU wide poverty threshold was suggested
by \citet[p. 115]{atkinson2005taking} already in 2005, though it has
only been used in some methodological exercises
\citep[see][]{fahey_case_2007} For figure 1.3 I plotted the
at-risk-of-poverty rates measured both at the national EU-wide poverty
threshold, that is 60% of EU median income.

![National at-risk-of-poverty rates using
national and EU level poverty threshold *Source: EU-silc*](images/pov_dodge.png) 

### From income poverty to material deprivation

Despite the fact the concept of relative income poverty is rooted in the
deprivation of wide range of assets have the actual deprivations also
made it back to the European poverty measurement. After the enlargements
of EU it soon became apparent that statistics on relative income
positions sometimes failed to capture essential differences in living
standards across the member states \citep{marlier_eu_2007}. The
fruitfulness of non-monetary poverty indicators was recognized in the
leading scholarly work related to the process of developing common
benchmarks to evaluate social development in the EU countries
\citep{atkinson_social_2002}. In 2009 the EU also decided to monitor
material deprivation, complementing the income based conceptualization
of poverty that were established a few years earlier. It became part of
the official poverty measurement for EU2020 strategy.

The idea to study material deprivation is not new, but has been on the
agenda in poverty research since the late 1970s at least, particularly
in the Ireland, the United Kingdom and the United States
\citep{townsend_poverty_1979,mack1985poor,nolan1996resources}. According
to this approach the focus of analysis is not on income, but rather on
goods and services households can consume. People and households unable
to afford certain basic items are considered to be materially deprived.
Although the conceptualization and measurement of material deprivation
are by no means straightforward, there seems to be some agreement that
assessments based on consumption tend to produce more reliable figures
on poverty than evaluations in terms of income. For example, respondents
in low income household often tend to under-report income, something
that may bias poverty estimates based on income surveys.

Based on arguments above, my research is more geared towards
multidimensional notion of poverty, where poverty is understood as more
relative to living standards of average European than average fellow
countrymen.

### Poverty and place - the spatial dimension

I was not able to find my untouched corner of sandbox with the
distinctions I made in the previous chapter. I needed something more and
I begun to "think spatially" a bit more after I read these two books:

-   Buzar, S. 2007. Energy poverty in Eastern Europe: hidden geographies
    of deprivation. Ashgate Pub Co.

-   Lobao, L., Hooks, G., and Tickamyer, A. R., 2007. The Sociology of
    Spatial Inequality. State University of New York Press.

Stefan Bouzarowski has a backgroud in enviromental sciences and this
book on post-socialist poverty answered and raised many questions in my
research. He reduces (energy) poverty to households ability to
adequately warm their homes and studies the mechanisms how energy
poverty is produced. He stresses that the households themselves have
limited capacity for solving the problem. They can pay the bills and
improve the efficiency of their housing, if they have money for that.
But the reason is often the supply of energy, either due to capacity
deficiencies or foreign politics, in some cases. I found his work as a
prime example of *place based poverty*, where poverty is produced not
only through social mechanisms, but also spatial. From that vein I have
tried to incorporate *place as a risk factor for poverty* with the new
and old social risks for poverty.

A book by \citet{lobao_sociology_2007} presented a somewhat solid
theoretical framework for studying inequalities at territorial or
subnational or regional level. They claimed quite right that analysis of
poverty in social policy departs often with an study of how
characteristics of individual or families are connected with higher or
lower risks of poverty. That is what we call socio-economic-demographic
risk factors for poverty. Of contextual factors, *temporal variation*
due to recessions, changes in state policies and other fluctuations are
given some attention in the literature and sometimes treated as major
theoretical subjects \citep{gundersen2004poverty}. *Spatial context* in
terms of territorial variation of economic production has been addressed
less often, though recognized by both scholars and policy makers
\citet{cotter2007placing}. Referring to \citet{tickamyer_space_2000}
they claim that attention to spatial variation is especially important
because of the substantial variation in economic structure and poverty
policies across places, and which may widen over time
\citep[p. 164]{cotter2007placing}.

\citet[p. 3-5]{lobao2007advancing} elaborates the importance of scale of
spatial analysis. Well-developed bodies of research on poverty and other
inequalities are found mainly at two opposing scales: the city or local
level and across the global system of nation-states, there in between is
a *missing middle*, territorial, regional or subnational spatial scale.

> *Insofar as the sociological imagination has been drawn largely to
> cities and nation-states, we are left with disciplinary gaps: large
> swathe of places, people, and substantive topics are left out of
> systematic investigations because they do not fall into the usual
> categories by which sociologist carve up space.
> *\citep[p. 4]{lobao2007advancing}

Spatial scale is important because it defines the territorial domain
from which processes creating inequality arises. Also, it can be seen as
the arena for targeting policy and political action.

### Growing inequalities of what?

Social inequality was reintroduced to public debate in 2008 first in
book *Growing Unequal* by \citet{oecd2008growing} and year later in
*Spirit Level* by \citet{wilkinson2009spirit} and just recently in
*Divided we stand* by \citet{oecd2011divided}. Inequality is growing and
policy analysts and political leaders are concerned with the
consequences. These reports are discussing the overall *social
inequality*, that in most cases is reduced to income inequality between
individual or household often measured with gini coefficient. Inequality
is then broken down to inequalities between certain socio-economic
groups. Figure 1.4 illustrates the trend lines of national (social)
inequalities. We can see that post-socialist countries (continous lines)
do not form a distinctive regime in this respect. Both the most unequal
and most equal country is ex-socialist.

![Social inequality in EU27-countries using
gini-coefficient 2003-2009. (Post-socialist countries with continous
line) *Source: Eurostat*](images/gini.png) 

Inequalities between geographic or administrative regions in EU have
received substantial scholarly attention in recent years, too. Focus has
been either on descriptive analysis and methodology
\citep[eg.][]{stewart_measuring_2002,jesuit2008subnational,heidenreich_patterns_2008,beckfield2009remapping,longford2010measures}
or on links between regional disparities and economic growth.
\citep[eg.][]{perugini2008income,ezcurra_does_2009,peters_regional_2010}.
These studies are pointing that inequalities *between countries* of EU
have been falling over the last 20 years. At the same time the regional
inequalities *within countries* have increased, especially within
European post-socialist countries. As a result most of the economic
inequalities today in enlarged EU are already inequalities within
nations, between regions the regions of EU. Figure 1.5 illustrates the
trends in regional GDP per capita figures from 1995 to 2007.

Here we can see a clear pattern of post-socialist countries with
originally low regional inequalities becoming more unequal (continuous
lines crossing the dotted lines). When we link the two dimensions of
inequality in figure 1.6 we can see even clearer patterns of countries.
Majority of post-socialist countries group at the top right corner of
plot high in both measures on inequality. Hungary and Slovakia are
interesting pair of countries with low overall income inequalities, but
high regional inequalities. In these countries the well-off and poor are
well separated from each other.

![Regional disparities at NUTS2-level in
EU27-countries 1995-2007. (Post-socialist countries with continous line)
*Source: Eurostat*](images/dispersion.png) 

![Regional disparities at NUTS2-level in
EU27-countries 1995-2007. (Post-socialist countries with continous line)
*Source: Eurostat*](images/scatter.png) 

### Spatial assesment of social policies

In respect to regional disparities I’m particularly interested in how
social policies coincide with spatial variation of income inequality and
poverty. Some public policies are targeted spatially eg. general fiscal
federalism (regional policies, agricultural subsidies) or at EU level as
regional funding. regional. Spatial or geographical targeting is
practised when the aim of intervention is defined in spatial terms as
region, while social targeting when aim is defined in social terms as
poverty. By nature, poverty can be seen both as social and spatial.
Mechanisms creating poverty can be rooted both in socio-economical or in
spatial structures of society. Various socio-economic factors as social
class, age, gender, income level are often linked with variations in
poverty, but less often is poverty is linked with spatial factors eg.
regional economy or unemployment, access to education, health care or
regional concentration of social factors(risks).

It may be claimed that spatial analysis of socially targeted policies as
social assistance has no relevance as it is *social*, not *spatial*
assistance. Among social benefits, social assistance has it’s specific
function in protection against poverty. And that is where rationality
arises: as poverty is rooted in social structures of society it is also
rooted in place. Therefore a should social programs aimed at alleviating
poverty should be analysed both, in terms of social and spatial
effectiveness. Another question is, of course, whether social targeted
benefit can alleviate spatial poverty?

Methodological advancement
--------------------------

One field I wanted to advance during my PhD project was the overall
methodology. Especially in quantitative research such analytical skills
are valuable across the different fields and even outside academia. In
my field of research I split methodology in two. One is command over
different analytical tools (eg. software) and the other is mastering of
various types analysis both in theory and practise in different
conditions.

The key principle in this work has been *a reproducible research*, which
in R-project is put as this: *The goal of reproducible research is to
tie specific instructions to data analysis and experimental data so that
scholarship can be recreated, better understood and verified.* The
demand for reproducibility is at the very ideas of empirical sciences
and has become a major topic in quantitative analysis. (The Science
magazine had a theme number on the topic in this December
\citep[see][]{jasny2011again}.) In social sciences it’s not here yet,
greatest obstacle being the data access, but due proliferation of data
it is becoming a topic as well. The extensive use of proprietary
analysis software, like Stata or SPSS, has naturally been the other
major obstacle. This is the one I have tackled and over the last two
years I have learned [R-language](images/http://www.r-project.org/) for
statistical analysis, [LaTeX mark-up
language](images/http://www.latex-project.org/) for type-setting and
[Sweave](images/http://www.statistik.lmu.de/~leisch/Sweave/) for compiling them
together. All free and open-source software that are constantly being
developed by the research community.

The work I have done in learning these tools has made me an active
member of those research communities flourishing around these tools. I
must admit that the daily mailing list discussions and examples of
hundreds of scientific blogs have been a great influence in my work.
They have also been of irreplaceable help when learning new analytical
skills. In that field I have worked most with spatial statistics,
multilevel modelling and longitudinal data analysis like survival
analysis and panel data regression.

In addition to spatial statistics in R, I have also studied quite a lot
of Geographic Information Systems (GIS), namely [Quantum
GIS](images/http://www.qgis.org/). In this vein Michael
\citet[p. 86.]{irwin2007territories} refers to early 20th century
classics and claims that *sociology as a discipline began with a core
interest in the relationship between space and social organisation*. He
states that proliferation of GIS software and release of census data and
other geographically aggregated data and the development of spatial
statistics has accelerated the territorially based analysis. Locating
data about social conditions in place allows a wide range of (spatial)
data to be linked with the analysis. Not only details on regional
economy and job markets, but also about geographical conditions like
distance or climate, access to services, infrastructure etc. Finland has
been a latecomer in this respect but during last few months there have
been a terrific advancement in the "open data" and classified (or very
expensive) spatial datasets are becoming available also for social
scientist.

My corner of the sandbox
------------------------

As a result of this messy introduction I can briefly point out the
directions to my corner the sandbox. In terms of poverty
conceptualisations it will more geared towards similar European wide
standards involving both income and multidimensional notions of poverty.
In addition to social structure of society I will also discuss the
poverty in relation to actual geographical structure of society. In
other words, I want to add *Where* to the basic question of social
policy analysis of *Who gets What*? As final point, I will conduct these
tasks according to principles of reproducible research and encourage
other fellow researcher to adopt these tools and ideas...

Some major activities in 2010-2011
----------------------------------

### Conference Publications

-   Kainu, M. *WHO GETS WHAT - AND WHERE? Regional poverty outcomes of
    social assistance in enlarged EU* In: 18th International Research
    Seminar on Issues in Social Security, June 10, 2011. Foundation for
    International Studies on Social Security. Seminar presentation.

-   Kainu, M. & Niemelä, M *Attributions for Poverty in European Post
    Socialist Countries.* In: 8th ESPAnet Conference 2010 Social Policy
    and the Global Crisis: Consequences and Responses, September 3,
    2010. Seminar presentation.

-   Kainu, M. *Cross-sectional profile of poverty and inequality
    outcomes of income redistribution schemes in European post-socialist
    countries.* In: 17th International Research Seminar on Issues in
    Social Security ’Global Crises’: Impact and Challenges for Social
    Security, June 11, 2010. Foundation for International Studies on
    Social Security. Seminar presentation.

### Summer Schools

-   **ESPANET/RECWOWE summer school: Welfare States of Eastern and
    Western Europe.** Central European University, Budapest, Hungary
    June 27 - July 5, 2011

-   **"Life course dynamics and the mechanisms of social inequality".**
    Turku Center for Welfare Research, University of Turku, Finland
    August 29th - September 2nd, 2011


Research plan for years 2012-2013
=================================

I will be very briefly here and only describe the current projects I’m
working with and my plans for the dissertation articles and for
implementation.

### Ongoing projects

At the time of writing this paper I’m working on two other paper. First
one is a joint article with prof. Mikko Niemelä titled *Attributions for
Poverty in East Central European Countries* where we are studying public
perceptions of the causes of poverty in East Central European countries.
Paper examines cross-country differences in attributions for poverty and
explores whether different lay explanations of poverty can be attributed
to specific socio-demographic characteristics, ethnicity, economic
circumstances and wider values and attitudes, such as generalised trust
as well as attitudes towards the role of government and democracy. Our
follow-up dataset focuses on (the effects of) financial crisis and
therefore a special emphasis is given to public perceptions of the
financial crisis and its association with attributions for poverty. I’m
not certain if I will include this article in my dissertation, probably
not, but we are working hard to have this submitted in next two months.

The second project is a book in Finnish titled "Eurooppalaiset elinolot"
that is run by the research department of Kela and studies the counter
play of various "transitions" (eg. retirement, unemployment, child
birth) in life cycles and welfare state.

Lately I have also been writing and analysing background material for
Aleksanteri institute Centre of Excellence (CoE) project.

### Dissertation topic

I redrafted the working title of my work for this paper as: *Poverty,
place and income redistribution - Analysis of poverty dynamics and
welfare state development in post-socialist transition*. As it became
clear in the first chapter I will put more emphasis in my analysis on
the spatial dimension of poverty that i originally planned. I also
raised the welfare state development to title, as due to simultaneity of
CeO-project I will work with that discussion a lot and want to
incorporate it with my work. The geographical focus remains the same and
I will study Russia in one or two of the article for the same reason,
though it was my idea in first place. As for the welfare policies I will
focus on income redistribution, namely the social cash benefits.

With poverty dynamics I’m referring to both temporal and spatial
variation in poverty. In poverty research, poverty dynamics are often
discussed through questions like: How likely are people to enter, exit,
and re-enter poverty? How long do people remain in poverty? And what
events are associated with entering and exiting poverty? These question
from one US analysis refer to poverty as a temporally varying phenomenon
which I will discuss in one of my articles, most probably the other one
on Russia.

Research Design
---------------

Here I will introduce the current ideas I have on the topic of my
articles. They are mostly already bit more than ideas, but none of them
is near to submission.

### Article 1 - (Non-Spatial) Social Policies and Regional Income Inequality in Poland and Hungary in 1986 - 2009

A quick abstract for this one:

> This paper utilizes both micro- and microlevel data to assess the role
> of social policies in growth of regional income inequalities during
> post-socialist transition from 1986 to 2009 in Hungary and Poland. A
> decomposition of certain inequality measures (gini, Theill) allows to
> estimate role of different income sources with the respect to increase
> in regional income inequality during transition period.

I’m currently working with the data to find out what actually can be
conducted and what cannot. This has been frozen since mid December, but
is soon melting. Here are just few graphs from preliminary analysis
based on recent data.

![image](images/regional_gdp) Regional trend lines of GDP/capita in Poland
and Hungary *Source: Eurostat*

![image](images/hun_pol) Regional variation in GDP/capita 2008 in NUTS3
regions in Poland and Hungary *Source: Eurostat*

![image](images/Rplot) Dynamics of income redistribution from regional
perspective in Poland and Hungary *Source: Eurostat*

### Article 2 - Social cash benefits and poverty spells in post-soviet Russia

A panel data assessment of entering, exiting and re-entering to poverty
during transition using Russia Longitudinal Monitoring Survey.

### Article 3 - Targeting of social cash benefits for materially deprived in Enlarged EU

A study of how socially targeted policies correspond with poverty
measured as material deprivation.

### Article 4 - Something about Russian regions and welfare state modernisation

Implementation
--------------

I’m running late from my original plan of implementation that is
presented on page two. In term of published articles. The main reason
has been that I haven’t been clear of my corner of sandbox and haven’t
managed take any of the ideas to the submitting phase. I’m trying to
catch up during coming two years.

**Table: Original schedule for implementation of the study**



Dissertation - a dispositio
===========================

Introduction
------------

Theoretical background
----------------------

Research Design
---------------

Main findings
-------------

Conclusions
-----------

Published articles
------------------

[^1]: At-risk-of-poverty rate can be also translated as a measure of
    income inequality among the poorer half of a country’s citizens. It
    is not sensitive to changes in income inequality happening in the
    wealthier half of population.
